Morning.
Good morning.
Welcome along today.
Looking forward to hearing from you in relation to the agreement on
trade and essential suppliers,
recently signed between New Zealand and Singapore.
Are we live streaming? Got nothing on the screen here.
Yep.
Up there? Okay then.
All right, excellent. So we are live streaming.
We have 30 minutes set down for today.
I'll hand over to you to make some introductions of your team and
introductory comments, and then I'm sure there'll be questions from the committee.
Thank you.
Good morning, Chair, and thank you very much.
Good morning to all the members of the committee as well.
My name is Mark Traynor.
I am
the special advisor in the trade and
economic group attached to our economic division.
Can I just pass to my two colleagues here also to
introduce themselves briefly?
Morning, Mr. Van der Molen, and good morning fellow members of FATIC.
My name is John Park. I'm the manager of the economic diplomacy and policy team in
the economic division of MFAT. Our team was the team that negotiated the
agreement.
Excellent.
Morning, Chair. Good morning
MPs.
My name is Laurie Perris. I am from the trade law unit at Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Trade.
Thank you.
Thank you very much. If I could just begin,
Chair, by setting some of the context, and then
talking a little bit about the agreement itself.
The government's priorities include strengthening New Zealand's
connections to the world,
removing barriers to trade, opening new markets,
and bolstering New Zealand's energy and wider economic
security. Another important priority
for us under the policy reset is
building on our relationship with Singapore and
Southeast Asia more generally.
Singapore is our fourth largest
goods trading partner,
and second biggest source of mineral oils and fuel
imports,
with a figure of around 3.27
billion in the year ending June 2025.
We have with Singapore a very
long-standing trade relationship.
So the two countries signed a comprehensive economic
partnership agreement in the year
2000, so that was essentially our second FTA after
CER.
Since that CEP with Singapore was ratified,
bilateral trade has grown year on year,
and in the year to December 2025,
two-way trade was worth more than $11 billion.
That's fourth overall on goods, third
overall on services trade, and the largest trading
partner in Southeast Asia.
In April
2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
both countries committed to a non-binding declaration
on trade in essential goods.
And that was aimed at ensuring that neither New
Zealand nor Singapore would impose restrictions like
tariffs on 120 essential goods,
like various food items,
pharmaceuticals, and medical equipment.
Building on that, in April 2022,
New Zealand and Singapore established a supply chains working
group, which has evolved into
this AOTs agreement. So, the point
I want to make here is that AOTs is part of a
continuum
of relationship building with Singapore, particularly
in this
area.
We have also built very extensive
FTA architecture,
including Singapore,
what's called the P4 agreement, which then has
evolved into CPTPP,
an agreement between Australia, New Zealand and ASEAN,
the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, another large
FTA involving Singapore and many other countries.
So there's a lot of architecture there.
In October 2024, cabinet agreed to
launch negotiations, and a year later,
the agreement was signed.
Well, it was concluded, negotiations were concluded in
October last year, and the agreement has been signed
very recently.
So that's the context,
Chair and committee members. Turning to
the nature of the agreement, I really want to stress it's a
novel, innovative agreement.
It's a binding agreement-And it contains legal
commitments that aim to prevent New Zealand and
Singapore from imposing export restrictions
on an agreed list of goods.
In contrast to the 2020 declaration,
which was non-binding and was in response to
a crisis, this agreement is binding,
treaty level, and is a proactive
initiative
that's designed to help both countries to prepare for
future crises.
It is structured as an annex
to the Singapore-New Zealand Closer
Economic Partnership Trade Agreement, and
that's important because that will ensure that New Zealand
is not required to extend the benefits of
the agreement to other countries.
Being part of the FTA of the CEP
means that we aren't obliged under the
WTO's most favored nation provision to extend the
benefits to others. It can be limited between New
Zealand and Singapore.
That said,
well, I'll come to it later, but there is an openness to build on
this with other countries that can meet the standards, but we have
a
built-in degree of control here.
We have, under AOTEA, both agreed
to not put export restrictions on essential
supplies. So it's a negative obligation.
And
what I would add, though, and this is another very important
point, it does not require government
to intervene in the market to ensure
private sector supplies.
That will be left to the market forces.
In technical terms,
forgive me for diving into a technical detail
here. But both parties have agreed
under
AOTEA to forgo our right
to use the critical shortages exception
in the GATT, which is part of the WTO,
GATT Article 11.2 ,
for an agreed list of essential products.
And so that's the crucial point
in this agreement.
We will still retain our rights, both countries,
to use other GATT and FTA exceptions
to impose
measures in circumstances such as threats
to national security,
the protection of animal,
human, and plant life and health. All of those
exceptions remain.
AOTEA also includes provisions related to
enhancing our supply chain cooperation with
Singapore, which are mainly in information sharing,
and ensuring that the movement of goods across borders
is as smooth as possible in the event of a supply chain
disruption.
And under the agreement, both parties will
also be required to inform the other if
they are experiencing a supply chain shortage
to any of the listed essential goods.
That's important for New Zealand because it will expand the
information sources that we have and will provide valuable
new insights for New Zealand into the
downstream movement,
in the supply chains of critical goods.
I want to stress that while the commitment is novel with
respect to
the GATT Article 11.2
, to the best of our knowledge, New Zealand has never
imposed such export restrictions during previous
supply chain shocks, and that reflects New Zealand's
ongoing commitment to
free trade and a rules-based
system.
The focus for us in this
agreement is fuel.
So that's where our essentials products list is focused, and that
relates to, as I said earlier, the importance of
Singapore as a supplier of fuel to New
Zealand.
We also have focused on health-related goods and
inputs for construction.
Effectively, this covers most of our
goods imports from Singapore.
And
Singapore's list is mostly foodstuffsUh,
including beef and sheep meat, seafood,
dairy products, cereals, fruits, and vegetables.
And for Singapore, the key benefit is that the agreement
helps to address its
strategic and indeed existential
concerns around food security. So that's the
driver.
I'd like to just pass to my colleague,
Zhong Ming,
to just speak
briefly about the benefits of the agreement.
Thanks, Mark.
Thank you.
And I'll keep this brief, given Mark has covered a lot of the points
of the agreement. I think I just want to put a note that the kind of Middle East
conflict and the pressure that has put on
supply chains, economic security, and resilience has really
heightened the attention on this agreement.
But it's reflective of our approach to trade and economic work
at MFAT, and that is to shore up and create new rules that
will buttress our work, building resilience.
So our exporters in the New Zealand economy
have that kind of safety net of the rules to be able to continue
and work with partners, and innovation. So Mark covered it.
We work with Singapore on a range of areas, but on the trade and economic
front, it's working to innovation with trusted
partners,
coming up with ideas where we can work together and cooperate, and
then maybe flowing those onto innovation to rules.
And that's an example. The 2020 declaration we had with Singapore was
innovation. It wasn't a binding rule.
Working off that towards this AOTS, where we have
binding rules, we work together for a mutual benefit.
I think the other parts have been covered, but I just want to say that this
agreement's also a real
emphasis on
what we want to do is to signal our support for free and open trade, which is why
we work with partners like Singapore who also
are supporters of that rules-based trading order.
So when we create these agreements,
we're looking at proactive approach.
The current environment at the moment is very unstable.
How can we work together while having a statement, a global statement,
and other countries will look at this and say, "We are supportive.
We're still supportive of the rules-based trading order,"
and
we also look to other partners maybe to join
or to take our lead as well on this.
That's, I think, all I'll say.
Very good. All right. Thank you very much for that overview.
Questions from members. Honorable Damien O'Connor.
Look, thank you very much and congratulations.
And
trade is very much an area of non-partisan kind of
parliamentary support, and so congratulations.
Just going through, because
one would have thought this was a brand-new agreement, it come out of nowhere, and
I'm looking back through the timeline.
I think 2000, CEP,
2020 declaration, I guess 2022, the supply chain
agreement. I guess it's been an evolution.
I'll put aside the fact that they were all done under labor governance,
but
the fact that this has been a growing relationship with
Singapore-
Singapore partners
... the fact of trading.
And I guess just to clarify that this
is a formalization of what has been a long process, I
guess, to get us here.
The supply chain agreement, which wasn't formalized around
essential services in 2020, it's followed through.
The 2022 working group, had they reached
a point where they thought there was a need to formalize this arrangement?
So
I would say that
there's a lot of work that has been underway in
terms of dialogue between us and Singapore, and Singapore
officials about how we can make
the
commitments between us
on a firmer legal
basis.
It's in the context of that evolution
that this agreement sits, I think.
As to whether or not it's specifically
that process reached a stage where
then it was necessary to
legalize it in this way. I think
I was not present myself at that stage.
I'm wondering if my colleague might have
an answer, or we could take it as a written
question if that would be helpful.
No. Well, thank you. I guess it's a question of whether
Singapore at the hub of this and
whether they see formal arrangements going forward as necessary
in a world of trade turmoil, I guess.
I'm
just interested in their views and attitude towards this.
I think based on conversations we had from the start,
it would be a natural flow on from that 2022 supply chains working group
towards the negotiations which started in 2024.
And I think talking to Singapore throughout the
negotiations and during the signing,
they are open to both innovating where it's not
hard and fast rules, but kind of signaling
statements on where we are like-minded on trade,
and then working towards whether it's bilaterally or plurilaterally,
talking to other partners and seeing what they are open to doing.
Supply chain
resilience is very important at the moment.
So when we have an agreement like this-That's binding.
It doesn't mean that we then have to tack on other partners and
make sure that it's binding. We can talk to other partners about, we started this
as a declaration, a non-binding declaration with Singapore, would you be
interested in also in discussing?
And I think those discussions are ongoing with some of our partners as well.
And final one. So nothing in this agreement would
prevent the addition of other
like-minded
parties to this agreement?
Our-
It's a bilateral agreement, but
the door could be open.
So our prime minister has indicated
openness to engagement with other
countries that wish to
conclude similar types of agreements.
This particular protocol sits in the context of the
bilateral FTA between New Zealand and
Singapore, and as I mentioned earlier,
that means that it's not
automatically have to be extended on an MFN
basis to everybody. So we're in a situation, we have,
if you like, a model here between New Zealand and
Singapore. Prime Minister's indicated that we are
open to the possibility of others, and indeed, I would
say Minister Maclay is actively pursuing some of these
questions in APEC at the moment.
We're continuing to talk with others.
So
the important point, I think, is that we've got a model here
for others if they're able to agree to
these standards. And that would mean, in particular, the
central question here is whether or not other countries
are able to agree to forgo
the Article 11 gap rights on
export restrictions or essential goods.
So it's a
dynamic
process,
if that answers your question.
Thank you. A supplementary question, Honorable Melissa Lee.
Thank you so much. Just a very quick
question. In terms of the build up to this agreement,
could you actually tell the public who's actually
watching the difference between what the
declaration actually achieved for New Zealand versus this agreement that will
actually achieve for New Zealand in terms of trade?
So the difference between the 2020 declaration-
Yeah
... and this agreement. So 20-
So,
people will actually understand, why do we need an actual agreement to formalize
it.
Right.
Was the declaration not good enough?
So if you could actually differentiate-
Uh-huh
... what that achieved for us and what this will achieve for us.
So the most important point is that the
declaration in 2020 was non-binding.
So it was an expression of the intention of two
governments not to impose restrictions on each other on
a list of products, including at that time,
pharmaceuticals and products of that nature
loomed pretty large.
This agreement is a binding
treaty level obligation, so that's the most
important difference. This agreement has a
negotiated list of essential goods
for both parties, Singapore and New Zealand.
It also has provisions in there, as I said,
to facilitate trade between the
two parties,
including assistance in
trade logistics and things like that.
But it's the binding nature is the most important thing, I
think.
I just have one supplementary comment to that, and there is a difference.
In 2020 was reactionary, and that doesn't mean it's less important.
It was in response to a pandemic,
and the realization the need to shore up supply chains for key,
at that time, medical and pharmaceutical goods.
Whereas this AOTEA agreement was proactive,
understanding that there will be future shocks and kind
of protecting ourselves through rules.
I guess, sorry, off the back of that in supplementary,
because it does say protocol to amend the agreement between
New Zealand and Singapore. So I guess that's the confusion.
People are not quite sure.
Yeah.
Ah, okay.
Thank you for that. Now, you mentioned under the
NIA around the existing agreement, plus
economic partnership having a provision for Singapore to adopt measures to
address critical shortages. Identified that as a potential
risk that they could use that provision under
this new agreement, potentially to
effectively stop the flow of goods outward.
Have you got any insights around or can you confirm if there are
any goods currently listed
that would be of concern?
Yeah.
So, on that particular question,
I want to take that, if with your agreement, as
a written question so that we can provide a
very precise answer- Okay ... to this question.
We have emphasized that
there's a very high threshold for Singapore to use that
provision.
The goods need to be identified as essential in its
domestic legislation.
Yes
The
situation needs to be causing major difficulties for Singapore.
Mm.
And then the application of any measure may not
be
used to in a discriminatory or arbitrary-
Yeah. So I understand all that. I'm just interested in whether there is anything
currently on that list-
Yeah
... that has been agreed that is potentially raising a flag
for you, is an area of concern for us.
Yeah.
If we could provide a written response-
Sure
... Chair.
Thanks. Venetia Wales.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for your work.
My question is around dispute resolution.
So given that this is an annex agreement, do the dispute
resolution terms of the parent agreement apply?
I almost would've thought that there might be some sort of expedited
dispute resolution model, given the nature of this
agreement, that it is supposed to address urgent
situations, and there may very well be disputes as to
when a supply chain disruption begins or
when it ends.
I'll pass to my legal colleague. Thank you very
much.
Thank you very much for the question.
Yeah, I can confirm
that, as has been pointed out, this is an amendment to the existing CEP, the
existing FTA. So in that way, the dispute resolution provisions of that FTA
will continue to apply in this context.
There is a note in paragraph 26 of this text, a provision to
do with
reaching mutually satisfactory resolutions on matters associated
with parts of this specific ATEZ agreement.
So that is an additional provision over and above the provision
contained and provisions contained in the broader CEP
FTA.
Right. Okay, any further
questions?
I think that's well done.
Thank you very much.
Yes. Yeah.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Good agreement. There are just a couple of little admin bits in the
NIA, if we could just address those.
At the top of page eight, there's just a couple of typos there that you probably
need to tidy up before this gets reported back.
It talks about,
from the bottom of page seven, the agreement will not impact on New Zealand's
existing domestic legislation or existing regulatory processes,
as such, no measures are needed
to adopt the...
It should be treaty, shouldn't it, or agreement rather than legislation,
because there is no legislation.
I'm sorry.
Sorry.
I've had a little-
Here is the first sentence at the top of page eight.
Yeah.
Which starts at the bottom of page seven.
It says, "The agreement will not impact on New Zealand's existing domestic
legislation or existing regulatory processes.
As such, no measures are needed to adopt the..." It says
legislation, but it should be treaty or agreement.
Yes. I think that's-
Yeah. So if we could just-
Thank you very much
... correct that one. That'd be great.
And then also at the bottom of that same paragraph, the last
sentence, "During a supply shock, the government will be required to re-" "...
refrain."
Yes.
Not refrain.
I, yeah.
I just raised those two because they are quite different.
We don't get to picking normally on little changes, but those both are potentially
misleading if they're not corrected.
So if we can-
Thank you very much
... get that amended.
There's one other which I picked up-
Yes
... when I slipped through the-
... the little control process-
Earlier on, but
those two would be great. All right.
Thank you.
Really appreciate the work. I think it's a great agreement.
So thank you for your time. Cheers.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.